                                                                                                         1



                   Carl Wieman Science Education Initiative
                                    Request for Proposals

This is a call for departmental proposals for support from the CWSEI. This provides background
information on the program, as well as the proposal details and selection criteria.

GOALS AND PHILOSOPHY OF THE INITIATIVE
   -   To achieve department-wide sustained educational improvement for all undergraduate students
   -   To improve the coherence of educational delivery within and across departments to ensure there
       is a well-organized progression of courses
   -   To obtain clear measures of student learning
   -   To achieve these goals in a sustainable manner (including not requiring substantial additional
       amounts of faculty time or money beyond the CWSEI funding)
   -   To make UBC a leader in science education

Fundamental philosophy: Science education is a science in itself, and a scientific approach can be
applied to optimize its delivery and impact. The CWSEI will assist science departments with
implementation of research based methods and technology to assess and optimize delivery of
education.


BACKGROUND AND METHODOLOGY

   -   A scientific approach to optimization of science education needs to include the following
       elements
          o Specification of measurable learning goals
          o Rigorous objective assessment of student achievement of these goals
          o Implementation of teaching methods aimed at maximizing achievement with respect to
              the specified goals, that are consistent with empirically established results and principles
          o Means for easy dissemination and duplication of materials, methods, and technology
          o Sustainable and continued optimization based on results of assessment

   The following descriptions are intended to be illustrative of how some of these ideas have been
   and/or might be implemented in a department, but are not intended to be a dictation of procedures
   that must be followed by any specific department.

   -   Definition of learning goals
          o This has been done by making an assessment of needs of students for various career
               goals combined with detailed discussions among the faculty in the department as to
               goals they perceive for the various courses and how these align from one course to the
               next. Discussions with other relevant departments are often included as well as
               employer feedback. Some departments have preferred to start from overall
               programmatic goals and work down to individual course goals. Most find it more
               manageable to start with individual course goals and eventually work up. Educational
                                                                                                              2

                   goals may be different for different student populations (honors, majors, other science,
                   nonscience).

               o These goals consider all aspects of student education that the faculty members in the
                 department feel are important. These typically include analytic and problem solving
                 skills, critical thinking, communication, conceptual understanding, attitudes about
                 science, mastery of technical terminology, knowledge of particular topics, etc. Most
                 people find it helpful to start the process of establishing course level goals with a
                 framework for delineating different levels of cognitive activity required, such as
                 Bloom’s taxonomy 1 .

      -    Assessment methods
              o There are now a number of assessment tools for looking at particular aspects of learning
                 that have been rigorously developed. Examples include the Force Concepts Inventory
                 that tests students’ mastery of the basic concepts of force and motion covered in first
                 semester physics and is now widely used, the Basic Electricity and Magnetism
                 Assessment that tests understanding of concepts in E&M as typically covered in second
                 semester physics, and the Colorado Learning Attitudes about Science Survey (chemistry
                 and physics versions) that measures students attitudes and beliefs about science and how
                 to best learn it. Instruments for testing conceptual understanding in chemistry,
                 geological sciences, and biology have been developed and are currently at various stages
                 of refinement.
              o These and similar assessment instruments suitable for machine grading, and hence large
                 scale use, are created using what is now a fairly standard multi-step methodology. The
                 essential aspects are to identify the desired goal to be tested, understand and characterize
                 relevant student thinking, and create questions for which the responses accurately reflect
                 the student thinking. In practice, the typical steps are as follows. 1) Obtain faculty
                 consensus as to relevant concepts/beliefs/skills to be assessed, often with input as to
                 manifestations indicating lack of mastery that they have observed. 2) Obtain data
                 allowing one to characterize student thinking on the specific items to be assessed. This
                 data is collected through examination of student work, observation of student
                 discussions and problem solving, surveys, and interviews of students before, during, and
                 after instruction on the item(s) of interest. 3) Open-ended questions are created and
                 given to sample populations. From those responses, multiple choice questions are
                 generated. 4) These are tested with experts to ensure there is a consensus as to the
                 validity of the question, and then tested in student interviews to ensure there is
                 consistency of interpretation and the reasons for choosing different possible answers are
                 consistent. 5) Assessment is then administered on a large scale. Various standard
                 statistical tests are done on the large scale data to check that the questions are testing
                 what is intended and results are reproducible and not dependent on irrelevant variables.
                 6) Typically over the first one to two years of large-scale use, there are minor revisions
                 as larger data samples reveal minor difficulties. In many cases, one or more of these
                 development steps can be replaced by referring to the science education literature.




1
    Benjamin S. Bloom, Taxonomy of educational objectives, published by Allyn and Bacon,.
                                                                                                       3

   - Examples of researched teaching methods
   There are a number of teaching methods that have been guided by and/or are consistent with
   cognitive science and educational research on important elements of developing long term learning.
   These all involve some aspects of concentrated mental engagement and targeted feedback. Some
   examples are:
          o “Peer instruction”- where there are regular short student-student debates during class.
               These are usually supported through some means by which students must submit
               answers to the questions that are the topic of debate.
          o Project-based or workshop style classes- students, often in small groups, engage in
               extended in-depth work on a specific problem or topic.
          o Published “Tutorials”- students work in small groups answering a carefully developed
               and sequenced set of questions on particularly challenging topics that confront common
               misconceptions and lead student to correct understanding and application of ideas on the
               topic. These are supported by TAs specifically trained in implementation of the tutorial.
          o Homework- Although there has not been extensive research on the precise forms of
               effective homework, there is extensive data indicating that the quantity and quality of
               study plays a major role in learning. Extensive homework that requires the use of the
               full range of desired expert skills and knowledge and allows for effective feedback to
               students has clear beneficial impacts.
          o “Just in time” teaching- using web or email based systems, various types of questions
               are posed to students and they answer shortly before class. The instructor then adapts
               coverage and discussion in subsequent class according to student responses.

   -   Existing educational technologies of proven value
          o Personal response systems (“clickers”)- students are regularly asked questions during
              class, and the clicker allows them to provide a response. A receiver records their
              identity and their answer and stores them on computer. These have been used in
              conjunction with peer instruction to good effect.
          o Interactive computer simulations- These encourage students to explore physical
              phenomena and develop deep understanding through discovering relationships and
              connections. They also aid students in developing visual models and conceptual
              understanding.
          o Computer graded homework systems- these automate many of the aspects of
              administering and grading of homework. Systems come with widely different
              capabilities ranging from merely saving instructor and TA time to “intelligent tutoring”
              systems. Such “intelligent tutoring” systems provide immediate feedback to the student
              in the form of hints or follow up questions targeted to address specific student errors.


Laboratory courses
   - Existing research literature on lab courses.
      It is universally recognized that laboratory courses have the potential to fill a unique education
      role, because they are the only classroom experience that can represent the full range of
      activities and thinking involved in actually doing science. However, the evidence is that, in the
      form they are often implemented, lab courses fall far short of reaching this goal. Research on
      the effectiveness of lab courses shows that the goals of the instructors are usually not
      understood or achieved by most students (especially those who are not likely to become
      professors). While the same sorts of problems have been seen in studies of other science
                                                                                                            4

           courses, the discrepancies are exceptionally large for lab courses. One likely contributor to this
           is that the typical lab course is intended to address a mixture of different educational goals.
           These goals encompass mastering techniques and hardware, learning science content, and
           developing the understanding and skills of science as an experimental activity. In many lab
           courses conflicts between some of these goals often remain unresolved. For example, if one
           desires a student to learn the basics of how to pose scientific questions and develop experiments
           to answer those questions, it is counterproductive if the equipment they are to use for this
           exercise is highly complex and unfamiliar to them. Laboratory organization and scheduling,
           grading policies, and inadequately trained TAs are among other factors that can also prevent lab
           courses from living up to their potential.

      - Alternative lab courses
         There are examples of alternative labs courses where there is good evidence that they are
         educationally effective. These courses usually have the lab activities fully integrated as part of
         a more general course, such as Workshop Physics 2 . They also have carefully defined goals for
         the lab activities, typically involve much simpler experimental hardware, and sometimes have
         much more time available for experimental design, redesign, reflection, and iteration than in
         many standard lab courses. The number and type of such proven-effective courses is limited
         however, and so it is likely that there are other models that would work but have yet to be
         widely tested. Because of the limited amount of research, the relatively high costs, and the
         intense emotions connected with lab courses, this is an area where it would be particularly
         appropriate to try a variety of approaches on an experimental basis and carefully assess the cost
         effectiveness of the results to guide creation of highly effective lab courses.


LEVEL OF SUPPORT
         The CWSEI will be spending at least $12 M over the next six years to achieve its goals. About
$10 M of this funding will be in the form of direct support to departments. The precise levels of
funding will depend on the size of the department and the scale of effort proposed, but are anticipated
to be in the range of $200-$400 K per year per department.
         The decision as to how these funds are to be spent will be up to the individual departments
within some broad guidelines. The commitment of funds will be for the full six year period, but this
will be subject to an annual review to check that reasonable progress is being made.
         In addition to the direct financial support to departments, the CWSEI will have a small central
staff to provide ongoing assistance to departments in their efforts. This will include providing relevant
references and training to faculty and staff, organizing workshops, coordinating efforts across
departments, coordinating with activities at the University of Colorado (CU) SEI and ensuring UBC
departments have ready access to relevant materials and software created at the CUSEI. Also, the
central CWSEI staff will take responsibility for tasks common to multiple departments and thus most
efficiently handled centrally. Examples will likely include such things as dealing with human research
subjects approval for obtaining student data, assisting in writing up and publishing science education
research results in suitable scholarly journals, developing interview protocols for collecting student
data, and the development and implementation of widely useful IT. Some central effort will also be
devoted to creating materials and technology that will save faculty time, particularly time connected
with teaching that is not directly enhancing student learning.


2
    E. Redish, Teaching Physics with the Physics Suite, Wiley, 2003
                                                                                                         5

ELIGIBILITY AND SELECTION CRITERIA
Eligibility: Departments in the Faculty of Science interested in implementing department-wide
initiatives. In this context, “Department” should be interpreted only as being the organizational unit
responsible for undergraduate education. Where the responsible unit is a combination of departments,
a proposal from the combination is appropriate.

   - Selection criteria
   The fundamental criterion is the likelihood of achieving the basic goals of the CWSEI as laid out at
   the top of page 1. Anything that is relevant to this will be important. Some specific factors that are
   obviously relevant are below.
           o Commitment to implement the five elements listed above for a scientific approach to
               optimization of science education.
           o Degree to which proposed enhancement plan impacts all undergraduate delivery within
               the department, rather than only selected classes.
           o Feasibility of proposed plans for broad buy-in and involvement of faculty and students.
           o Sustainability of the improvements developed with CWSEI funding. This includes both
               financial sustainability and indications of departmental level commitment to
               sustainability. For example, oversight bodies to ensure that once goals and assessments
               and demonstrably effective materials are established by the department for courses,
               these are maintained and reused.
           o Indications of depth and breadth of faculty interest and incentives to improve student
               learning.
           o Plans to ensure coherence of educational focus and enhancements across the curriculum.
           o Integration with existing efforts where present.
           o Inclusion of ideas for improving efficiency. This could include development of
               materials or software, reorganizing workloads or programs, etc. so as to save faculty
               time or use other resources more effectively.
           o ….

APPLICATION PROCESS
Stage 1. Departments choosing to participate and receive funding should write a brief proposal (~2-4
pages). To be considered for the first round of selection, this proposal must be submitted by
December 1, 2006.

Stage 2. All unsuccessful proposals will automatically be carried over to subsequent selection rounds
unless they are withdrawn or replaced with a revised proposal. There will be opportunities for
discussion and feedback on any unsuccessful proposal. The deadline for submitting a new or revised
proposal for the second round of selections is March 30, 2007. Deadlines for the additional selection
round(s) will be announced at a later time.

   -   Proposals will not be expected to include detailed plans for specific teaching enhancement, only
       plans for the process by which the department will undertake this effort. This should discuss
       the level of involvement of faculty, staff, and students, and the organizational structures and
       procedures that will support this effort and sustain improvements that are developed and tested.
       Rough estimates as to the amount of funds needed and how they will be used should be
       provided for informational purposes, but will not be considered accurate or binding.
                                                                                                      6

Selection and Funding timeline
  •   By the end of December a decision will be made as to the first department to be supported and
      at what level. Funds will be available in early January.
  •   Stage 2. Two more departments will be selected during the spring semester based on proposals
      submitted as of March 30, 2007, with funding available shortly thereafter.
  •   Stage 3. Additional departments will be selected during subsequent years.
