      How to Develop Learning Goals for an Established Course: The Computer Science Model 1
                                      Developed by Beth Simon: May 2008, UBC

Overview: The goal of this process is to develop a set of learning goals (also called learning outcomes) for
existing computer science courses. These goals should describe, in detail, what students can be expected
to do by the time they finish a course. The goals would be useful to:
  • Instructors of the class – to prepare the course, focus lectures, develop exams, and have a solid,
      coherent story of the course.
  • Students of the class – to understand more precisely the expectations of instructors, to see the
      bigger picture value of the materials presented, and to have a set of specific expectations that can
      be used to focus attention in class and studying outside of class.
  • Instructors of courses which follow this one – to have an explicit description of the skills and abilities
      students entering the course are expected to have, to identify areas of expected knowledge that are
      not supported through pre‐requisite coursework.

The results of the process are encapsulated in a spreadsheet with 2 worksheets. The first is a set of topic
level goals (35‐100 or so) that describe detailed materials at the lecture or “topic” level. The second is a
course level goal grid with 3‐7 higher, course level goals. Under each goal, a list of topic level goals which
contribute to that course goal are listed.

General Process Outline: The model employed to develop these goals has been to have 2 (though we
suspect 3‐4 works as well) instructors who have recently taught the course (or are otherwise engaged
with it) meet with a facilitator (STLF) for a period of 8‐12 hours in either 1 hour a week or 1.5 hours every
other week format. Very little outside work is needed from the instructors each week (occasionally 5‐20
minutes of brainstorming or finding materials (lecture slides, exams). The facilitator spends approximately
1 hour outside of the meeting each week (on reminders to instructors, rewording materials, cleaning up
LG wording, reviewing materials (exams, homeworks, etc.)). The facilitator organizes and leads the
meetings, and takes all notes (documenting the brainstorming and results of the LG creation). Instructors
talk and brainstorm, but do not have to take notes.

Step 1: Assessment‐Driven Topic Goals: Begin by asking (before the first meeting) for recent exams given
in the course. At a meeting, all faculty will sit and work through the questions on the exam developing
“topic level goals” which are reflected by a correct answer on that exam question. This goes something
like “if a student gets this question correct on the exam, then it shows that the student can…” Through
this process we identify at least what is expected on the final. This then brings up things that are assessed
on possible exams throughout the term, on homeworks, etc. It also allows for the beginnings of
discussions (often about “high level” things) that we want students to get but we don’t ask on the exam.
This is OK, but the facilitator should feel free, to say, but if we don’t ask exam questions on this, how do
we know if they “got that” high level ability or not?

Step 2: Lecture‐Driven Topic Goals: Since we cover many things in class that we don’t necessarily assess
on the final exam, we next walk through (mentally or by actual review of lecture slides) the materials
covered in the course, topic by topic. Each topic is named (discussion happens about ordering, etc.) and a
list of things that students should be able to do “after that material/section is covered” is named.
Instructors will start by saying “we talk about this, we do that on the board”, and need to be prompted
with statements like “so, afterwards you would expect a student to be able to do what”? Or propose
something as a possible thing students would be able to do and the instructors will say “no, more than
that, like this” or “no, not that in depth, like this”. Instructors may find out that they each have different
expectations of depth of understanding in certain areas.

1
    This documents the process used in Computer Science, but it is certainly not the only process that can be used.
Instructors (and facilitators) will also find it common to start by saying “students will understand this and
that”. This is OK in the brainstorming phase. But the group should immediately (in the next few minutes
of discussion) move to try to concretize “understand” by explaining exactly what would demonstrate
understanding. Would that be: rank these algorithms in complexity order, compare and contrast the
performance issues from disk access models, describe real world scenarios that reflect stacks versus
queues, etc. Sometimes a goal listed as “understand” may get stuck there and have to be revisited at the
next meeting. These are usually keys to goals that are not particularly clear or clean in the class.

This process takes the majority of the meeting times (5‐7 weeks). Progress is slow in the beginning, but
moves much more quickly after about the ½ way point as instructors get practiced in mentally converting
what “they do” in class content into statements about what they can expect students to do after that
material is covered. Instructors will get derailed when they differ in viewpoint on a topic or when a topic
is difficult or perhaps doesn’t fit well in a course. Instructors should be given some time to discuss issues
that arise in teaching this topic (and the facilitator should document this). But after 5‐7 minutes, the
instructors should be reminded, “OK – I’ve documented our concerns here – let’s go back to focusing on
what we actually do right now, not what we wish we did in this case”.

Depending on the level of detail and the course, we’ve seen 30‐100 topic level goals developed usually
spanning 5‐15 topics. These are listed in a 2 column spreadsheet (landscape), with the topic name in the
left column and the goals themselves in the right column. The goals complete a common stub of “After
this class students can…”. Each goal should be named something like A1, B3,... where the letter
corresponds to a topic and the number to the number of goals under that topic.

Step 3: Course Level Learning Goals: After the topic level goals are done, in 1‐2 meetings course level
goals are developed. Often, instructors can be asked to independently brainstorm these outside of a
meeting and send them in email to the facilitator. Then one meeting can be used to review these –
merging similar ones, getting better wordings, etc. Occasionally, these start out too low level – basically
subgroups of the topics. Through discussion, and focusing on how this course contributes to the general
development of a student in the major, these can be made more high level. After identifying (a not
perfect list, that may still have some duplication) of 5‐12 course goals, instructors can be assigned
(outside of a meeting) to place each topic goal under the column of any course goal it applies to. This can
also be done in a meeting, but it can be more efficient simply to have everyone bring their grid and to
discuss where people differed and if a course goal was hard to find things to fit under, or if two course
goals really seemed to be interpreted as the same thing. Eventually, course goals should be pared down
to approximately 4‐7. Look for course goals that have few topic goals supporting them, or topic areas that
fit under only one course goal.

Advice/Common Expectations: The first few weeks are marked by a lot of discussion, which may not lead
directly to completed LGs. This is especially the case for problematic courses, recently designed courses,
or courses where significant differences exist in coverage depending on the instructor. This is OK.
Discussion among the faculty should be allowed to occur, with the facilitator bringing people back on task
occasionally. The focus should remain primarily on documenting what is done currently rather than
bemoaning what we would like the course to accomplish.

Instructors (and everyone) will tend towards high‐level, grandiose statements that are very meta‐level.
These need to be deconstructed (especially in the beginning).

Affective goals (goals about students developing appreciation, etc.) may come up in the discussion of
course level goals – though they may not be assessed on exams, homeworks, etc. Affective goals may be
an important part of a course – most notably in courses for non‐majors.
