                                     The “Beyond CWSEI” Discussion
 What key elements must we preserve to sustain the use of evidence-based teaching methods and drive further
                               improvement of science education at UBC?

INTRODUCTION
On April 20, 2012, a 1 hour 45 min public discussion facilitated by Ian Cavers, Assoc. Dean of the Faculty of Science was held
at the CWSEI End-of-Year event. Over 50 people participated, including research and teaching faculty members, CWSEI
Science Teaching and Learning Fellows (STLFs), CWSEI and Skylight staff, and a few graduate students. The purpose was to
consider the question posed above in the title. For the sake of clarity, the question was posed to participants in two parts:
1. What current practices must be preserved to maintain the use of evidence-based teaching methods?
2. What could we do to drive further improvement of science education at UBC?
Participants were asked to initially think individually about question 1 and make a list of about five comments. They then
worked in groups of about eight to develop group lists that reflected the consensus priorities of each group. Finally, each
group reported to all participants, priorities were listed on a white-board, and a whole-room discussion was led by Simon
Peacock, Dean of the Faculty of Science. This process was repeated for the second question.
The prioritized items collected from each group were assembled into categories by Gulnur Birol, Sarah Gilbert, Francis
Jones, and Ido Roll. The process was iterative, and ten categories of comments emerged. Interestingly, comments from
participants did not separate into two principal themes based on the two questions. Instead, we found the ten categories
group conveniently into four main themes: (I) Supporting Faculty in Translating Principles to Practice; (II) Student
Involvement; (III) Institutional Support and Culture; and (IV) Collaboration and Communication.

SUMMARY OF THE COMMENTS AND DISCUSSION
The following summarizes responses to the two questions identified using the discussion process described above. The
organization of ten categories into four themes does not represent a hierarchy. The bracketed numbers of comments refer
to the number of items contributing to each category, from the roughly sixty “key elements” prioritized by groups. Some
comments are included in multiple categories. See www.cwsei.ubc.ca/Files/EOY/EOY2012/BeyondCWSEI_items.pdf for lists
of the comments in each category.

I. Supporting Faculty in Translating Principles to Practice
1. Local expertise (8 comments)
    The majority of the comments in this category can be characterized by this statement: “Dedicated fulltime experts (like
    STLFs) at departmental level.” In fact, five of the six groups had this type of recommendation as their first item. Many
    felt that these should be permanent faculty positions, perhaps hybrid STLF/Instructor positions. There was a strong
    emphasis that this support needed to be embedded in the department, e.g. “Local support (at departmental level)
    from experts who can communicate evidence-based teaching and learning” and “STLF (like) consultants in the
    department helping to implement techniques on an individual basis and spread ideas.” Other comments in this
    category included the need for IT support for courses (mainly educational technology support).
2. Science education research (12 comments)
    Five of the six groups commented on the importance of supporting science education research in the Faculty of
    Science. As one group put it, “(to) enable, facilitate, (and) reward science education research at the scholarly level.”
    The comments emphasize several aspects of science education research. First, the importance of continuing to “collect
    data and objective evidence to help identify best practices.” Second, comments emphasized the leadership role that
    UBC assumes in science education research in Canada and the importance to maintain that role, for example, by
    disseminating knowledge that is developed here. This flow of information is bidirectional, as identified by one group:
    “1) continue to present UBCs results at teaching conferences; 2) bring awareness of best practice elsewhere back to
    UBC”. Last, many groups commented that science education research should be recognized as equivalent to other
    types of research in the Faculty of Science.
3. Instruction, assessment, & curriculum (11 comments)
    All six groups contributed to this category of recommendations. Mandating, defining, using, and evolving learning goals
    were identified by three groups. The importance of actively reviewing, developing and/or defining curriculum of
    programs (not just courses) was mentioned by another three groups. The words “best practices” and “techniques”
    were used generally in recommendations about the need to mandate, enforce, monitor and improve how teaching is
    done. Two groups said it is important to continue data collection about effectiveness of individual courses as well as
    whole programs. They also said the focus should be on measuring improvements in student knowledge and abilities,
   but that perceptions and attitudes are also important. In the subsequent whole-room discussion, a further comment
   recognized the importance of articulating what students “need” from degree programs, based on how graduates and
   employers will use the knowledge and skills gained.

II. Student Involvement
4. Student voice and participation (5 comments)
   Three groups mentioned “hearing from students” in one form or another. There was a reminder to account for
   diversity of students (i.e. no single teaching/learning approach is optimal for all students). Two groups recommended
   empowering (i.e. teaching) students to express their experiences, perceptions and preferences, and to knowledgeably
   critique the teaching they encounter. Two groups also said that both faculty and students should realize that students
   must be actively engaged in learning. Also, students should be included as active contributors in educational research
   projects. One group recommended focusing these efforts on first year students, including, for example, the new UBC
   “pathways” initiative. Finally, in the subsequent whole-room discussion, new points mentioned included the need for
   ongoing class observations, as well as student & faculty interviews and surveys.
5. Teaching Assistant development (4 comments)
   Three groups had comments about the need for professional development opportunities for graduate students and
   specifically teaching assistants (TAs) who are deemed to play an important role in science teaching and learning. TA buy
   in to support active learning and assessment was felt to be important for sustainability. In the whole room discussion it
   was emphasized that TA’s play an important role and every new crop of TAs needs to be brought up to speed every
   year so there needs to be support for development of these TAs.
6. Graduate program (3 comments)
   The comments in this category emphasized the involvement and training of graduate students in educational projects.
   Two groups suggested offering a graduate program in science education research.

III. Institutional Support and Culture
7. Structure and Culture (8 comments)
   Four of the six groups commented on the importance of developing policies and structures at the Faculty of Science
   and departmental levels that promote evidence-based teaching and education research. There was emphasis on
   maintaining the culture that values these practices and active involvement in learning for both student and faculty.
   Four comments suggest having some type of structure to maintain the culture, e.g. “some kind of central "entity" at
   the faculty level to provide professional development, communication between the individuals in various departments
   (ex. reading groups, repository for best practices).”
8. Incentives for improving instruction (12 comments)
   All six groups commented on providing incentives (including requirements) for faculty to incorporate evidence-based
   teaching practices. There was emphasis in the whole-room discussion that these efforts take a significant amount of
   time. Suggestions included course buyouts (reduced teaching load), more student help with courses, some other form
   of credit for the effort, and various forms of requirements. Four groups mentioned modifying the promotion and
   tenure process, e.g. “Tenure contingent on effective teaching (evidence based teaching addressed in the review
   process).” It was acknowledged during the whole-room discussion that this would require a collective effort between
   the administration and faculty association. Another theme was that faculty should be encouraged to observe their
   peers’ teaching both within and outside of their departments. This was elaborated on in the whole-room discussion,
   emphasizing the importance of formative assessment of teaching, particularly for pre-tenure faculty.
9. Professional development for faculty (5 comments)
   Three groups commented that the FoS should offer professional development support for faculty on how to implement
   and assess these practices. In addition to workshops, several groups suggested to include mentoring to support faculty.
   These mechanisms to support best practices should be perceived as bonuses, rather than punishments.

IV. Collaboration and Communication
10. Collaboration and communication (6 comments)
   One comment in this category talked about “establishing a culture that encourages and values mentoring, coaching,
   innovation, and communication in education.” Overall, all comments in this category talked about supporting
   communication and information flow – across departments and institutions, as well as across stakeholders (e.g., faculty
   and students). All six groups commented on the importance of sharing practices and findings, and learning about new
   practices.
